feat(eos5): epic hygiene rules, container-bead gates, whats-next redesign (#72)
scotthamilton77/agents-config: src/user/.agents/skills/whats-next/SKILL.md

---
name: whats-next

> description: Surfaces the right beads work list for the current session. Use when the user asks what work is available, what needs attention, what to work on next, what to brainstorm, what to plan / decompose, or what to implement. Do NOT use for checking a specific bead.

Author: ```suggestion
description: Surfaces the right beads work list for the current session. Use when the user asks what work is available, what work is ready, what needs attention, what to work on next, what to brainstorm, what to plan / decompose, or what to implement. Do NOT use for checking a specific bead.
```

Author: Applied verbatim in 0e4af80.

model: sonnet[1m]
---

# whats-next

Surface the right work list for the current user intent. One skill, five modes.

## Step 0: Determine mode from the user's exact message

**Do this before collecting any data.** Re-read the user's message word-for-word and map intent to a `--mode` value:

| User intent (exact phrasing) | `--mode` value |
|---|---|
| No qualifier — "what's next", "what should I work on" | `all` |
| "what needs attention", "human escalations" (explicit) | `human` |
| "brainstorm", "what's next to brainstorm", "ready to brainstorm" | `brainstorm` |
| "implement", "implementation-ready", "run-queue", "what to implement" | `implementation` |
| "planning", "planning-ready", "needs decomposition" | `planning` |

> `all` is the entry mode: it shows all modes: attention items, planning-ready containers, brainstorm-ready, and the implementation queue.

Author: Same as the collect.py argparse thread: owner-approved revision of the original AC. The unqualified intent now resolves to `all` mode (human + planning_ready + brainstorm + implementation), per Scott's explicit instruction "I'm changing the default operation of this skill to show ALL" on the prior round.

> `default` is the entry mode: it shows attention items, planning-ready containers, and brainstorm-ready leaves — but NOT the implementation queue (request it explicitly).

Author: ```suggestion
`default` is the entry mode: it shows all modes: attention items, planning-ready containers, brainstorm-ready, and the implementation queue.
```

I'm changing the default operation of this skill to show ALL.  Double-check the collect.py script to also ensure this is supported.

Author: Applied in 0e4af80. `--mode default` renamed to `--mode all` and behavior expanded — `all` now emits four sections (human + planning_ready + brainstorm + implementation). collect.py argparse choices, internal branches, JSON `mode` field, and tests all updated; SKILL.md mode table, examples, and prose rewritten to match.

Lock in the mode now. Do not infer intent from prior conversation — the user's exact words are the only signal.

## Step 1: Collect data

> Run the helper script with the chosen mode. Default limit is 10 per section. Pass `--limit 0` for all.

Author: ```suggestion
Run the helper script with the chosen mode. Default limit is 10 per section. Pass `--limit 0` for all.  Examples below:
```

Author: Applied verbatim in 0e4af80.

```bash
python3 "${CLAUDE_SKILL_DIR}/collect.py"                   # default mode
python3 "${CLAUDE_SKILL_DIR}/collect.py" --mode brainstorm
python3 "${CLAUDE_SKILL_DIR}/collect.py" --mode implementation
python3 "${CLAUDE_SKILL_DIR}/collect.py" --mode planning
python3 "${CLAUDE_SKILL_DIR}/collect.py" --mode human
python3 "${CLAUDE_SKILL_DIR}/collect.py" --limit 0          # no truncation
```

The script returns a JSON object whose top-level `mode` field carries the requested mode. Section keys vary per mode — **absent sections are absent from JSON, not empty arrays**:

| `--mode` value | Section keys emitted |
|----------------|----------------------|

> | `default` (or omitted) | `human`, `planning_ready`, `brainstorm` |

Author: ```suggestion
| `all` (or omitted) | `human`, `planning_ready`, `brainstorm` |
```

Author: Applied in 0e4af80 with one small extension: included `implementation` in the section list since `all` mode now renders four sections (per your :23 and :105 comments). Flag if you wanted the table row to stay 3-section only.

  "planning_ready": [ ...beads ],
  "brainstorm":     [ ...beads ]
}
```

Each bead entry (already prefix-stripped and typed-ancestor split):

```json
{
  "id":              "agents-config-ffxh",
  "short_id":        "ffxh",
  "priority":        1,
  "title":           "...",
  "labels":          [...],
  "milestone_col":   "abn9",
  "feature_col":     "vaac",
  "parent_epic_col": "7bk.13",
  "type":            "task"
}
```

- `id` — full bead ID (use for any `bd` operation that needs the canonical ID)
- `short_id` — prefix-stripped ID; **use for display**
- `milestone_col` — nearest `milestone`-type ancestor short_id, or `""`
- `feature_col` — nearest `feature`-type ancestor short_id, or `""`
- `parent_epic_col` — immediate parent short_id (regardless of type), or `""`
- `type` — the bead's `issue_type`

All sections are pre-sorted: **priority ascending (P0 first), then `created_at` ascending**.

## Step 2: Render sections

Skip any section whose list is empty.

| Section key | Heading |
|---|---|
| `human` | **Needs your attention** |
| `planning_ready` | **Planning-ready** |
| `brainstorm` | **Ready to brainstorm** |
| `implementation` | **Ready to implement** |

> `default` mode renders attention + planning-ready + brainstorm in that order. The implementation queue surfaces ONLY on `--mode implementation` — the user must ask.

Author: ```suggestion
`all` mode renders attention + planning-ready + brainstorm + implementation queue in that order.
```

Author: Applied verbatim in 0e4af80.

- **Parent Epic** — `parent_epic_col`; blank if empty (immediate parent short_id, displayed regardless of type)
- **Bead ID** — `short_id`
- **Type** — `type` field
- **Title** — full bead title, untruncated

Example:

```
| P | Milestone | Feature | Parent Epic | Bead ID | Type    | Title                                        |
|---|-----------|---------|-------------|---------|---------|----------------------------------------------|
| 1 | abn9      | vaac    | 7bk.13      | ffxh    | task    | Audit-trail-required closure for human beads |
| 1 | qn0g      |         | qn0g.1      | owqa    | task    | Add brainstorm-readiness gate                |
| 1 |           |         |             | abn9    | milestone | Milestone M1 — Stabilize and ship          |
| 2 | abn9      |         |             | bf6     | task    | Externalize long bead specs to docs/beads/   |
```

Close with a summary line. If the displayed count equals the total: `Ready: N beads`. If truncated: `Showing top 10 of 42 brainstorm, 3 of 3 planning. Pass --limit 0 to see all.` If every section is empty: `All clear — no open beads ready for attention.`

## Red Flags

| Rationalization | Reality |
|---|---|

> | "The wording was ambiguous so I used default mode" | The user's exact words are the signal. Use the intent table; default is the catch-all for absent qualifiers, not ambiguous ones. |

Author: ```suggestion
| "The wording was ambiguous so I used the default `all` mode" | The user's exact words are the signal. Use the intent table; default is the catch-all for absent qualifiers, not ambiguous ones. |
```

Author: Applied verbatim in 0e4af80.

| "I already had context so I inferred intent" | Step 0 says re-read the message. Inference is not re-reading. |
| "They probably meant brainstorm" | Probably is not the same as matching the intent table. |

> | "Default mode shows everything, so it's safer" | Default omits the implementation queue intentionally. Showing the wrong list is not safer. |

Author: ```suggestion
| "User's stated intent is unwise. Default mode shows everything, so it's safer" | Respect the user's stated intent.  Showing the wrong list is not safer. |
```

Author: Applied verbatim in 0e4af80.

|---|-----------|---------|-------------|---------|---------|----------------------------------------------|
| 1 | abn9      | vaac    | 7bk.13      | ffxh    | task    | Audit-trail-required closure for human beads |
| 1 | qn0g      |         | qn0g.1      | owqa    | task    | Add brainstorm-readiness gate                |
| 1 |           |         |             | abn9    | milestone | Milestone M1 — Stabilize and ship          |
| 2 | abn9      |         |             | bf6     | task    | Externalize long bead specs to docs/beads/   |
```

Close with a summary line. If the displayed count equals the total: `Ready: N beads`. If truncated: `Showing top 10 of 42 brainstorm, 3 of 3 planning. Pass --limit 0 to see all.` If every section is empty, the empty-state message is mode-specific so it does not falsely point a single-section caller at the human-attention queue:

| `--mode`                | Empty-state line                                                                  |
|-------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

> | `all` (or omitted)      | `All clear — no open beads ready for attention.`                                  |

Author: ESCALATE — round-cap exceeded (round 5; skill rule: when round ≥ 3 AND a new review arrives, FIX items reclassify to ESCALATE). Filed under `agents-config-y9mm` **Cluster E** (doc consistency drift). One-line doc edit, bundled with the rest of the round-5 doc/architectural items per the wait-for-pr-comments hard cap. See y9mm description for full Cluster E enumeration.
